Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host as always, Ricardo Lobs and
the MG by Doctor Elizabeth Anderson. She is mcshay
professor of Public Philosophy, John Dewey, distinguished University professor
and Arthur F Feral professor at the University of
Michigan. Her latest book and the book we're talking
about today. He hijacked how neoliberalism turned the work
ethic against workers and how workers can take it
back. So, Doctor Anderson, welcome to the show. It's
a big pleasure to everyone.
It's great to be here.
So let's start perhaps uh all the way back
at the origins of the work ethic or at
least the work ethic that we're talking here about
today. So, uh what are the origins of the
protestant work ethic? And what is it exactly?
So the work ethic was invented by Puritan ministers
in England uh starting in the late 16th century,
but it reached its sort of peak of theory
in the 17th century. Uh The Puritans were Calvinists,
so they're very stern, they were the killjoys of
the reformation, not no pleasure here. So that, that
basically what they said was because under Calvinism, everyone
is predestined by God to be either saved or
damned. Everyone is desperate to know whether they're saved
and to gain assurance that they are saved. The
parents had said you can't look into your heart,
right? To tell whether you really have faith that
Jesus is your savior. Because we're so we have
such a strong motive to deceive ourselves about the
quality of our faith that we can't rely just
what we desperately wanted to be true. So the
only way you could tell it through your behavior
and you have to work like crazy. Well, why
would work be a sign of f it's because
work. God commands all human beings to work to
promote the welfare of our fellow human beings. That
is what we're placed here on earth to do.
God has given us all these natural resources, the
earth itself to enable us to help our fellow
human beings on earth and conscientiously working very hard
and using those natural resources that God gave us
to help our fellow human beings. That's why we're
here and to pursue God's commands faithfully is the
sign that you really have faith in God. Right?
So you have to work really hard. You can't
waste any resources. You're not allowed to waste time
either, right? No idleness here. You're supposed to save
up your earnings. You can't just waste them on
frivolities and luxuries and things like that. Uh You
have to use every penny to promote the real
welfare of our fellow human beings and not, you
know, frivolous junk.
But do you have any idea how exactly these,
I mean, let's call it an ideology for the
time being. We'll come back to that question later
on. But, or how this ideology developed, I mean,
did it have something to do with, for example,
the advent of capitalism because it suited capitalism as,
uh, a sort of econo uh new economic uh
structure or was it something about the, I don't
know, the psychological traits of people who like this
kind of ideology, the Calvinist specifically or was it
just something that was already part of the culture
from which Calvinists stemmed? And I mean, these are
just three hypotheses it could be.
So I agree with Max Weber who wrote the
original scholarly study of the Protestant work ethic. It's
called the Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.
And what we said is the Protestant ethic. The
work ethic predates modern capitalism as we know it
in the 17th century. It wasn't yet on the
scene. So he reads the puritans and I agree
with him as fundamentally theologically oriented. Ok. It's really
all about God and God's commands for human beings
and hope for salvation and things like that. Um
And what Baber said was despite the fact that
their aims were Godly and oth otherworldly because it
promoted an ethic of disciplined labor. It set the
stage for capitalism, modern capitalism as we know it,
that is capitalism that's based on highly disciplined, highly
organized wage labor and enduring uh workers to the
drudgery of the industrial revolution. It kind of, it,
it kind of set the stage to enable the
industrial revolution to leap forward. But that didn't happen
until the 18th century.
And is there any relationship between the work ethic
and utilitarianism? And if so, what would it be?
Absolutely. So the puritans invented utilitarianism. There's a wonderful
Puritan theologian Richard Baxter who still studied today in
seminaries, by the way, uh he formulated the first
real statement of what is known today as act
utilitarianism. He said, give it a choice between promoting
a greater or a lesser good. You have a
strict duty to promote the greater good. And keep
in mind that one of the axioms of uh
the church of England, which was theologically Calvinist is
that there's no such thing as super Arrogation of
doing anything beyond the call of duty right now.
You have to maximize the good, right and you're
slipping, it's, it's simple to do anything short of
that. And you can see some of the same
moral rigor is among utilitarians today. If you look
at, say somebody like Peter singer, even though undoubtedly
he's made immense amounts of money on his books
and lectures and so forth. But he lives a
very frugal life just as those Calvinist thought he
should. And, and he's, and he's dedicated most of
his income to charity, which is exactly what Baxter
said should be done with all that wealth you're
accumulating from all that hard work you're doing.
So, perhaps some of these, uh, I mean, original
work ethicists would be into things like effective altruism
if they were alive.
Baxter was already there. And what's remarkable is Baxter
actually has a wonderful, uh claim that exactly parallels
an argument that Peter Singer in, in advocating for
altruism, uh effective altruism made back at, I can't
remember 1980 something. Uh, SINGER'S analogy was, well, suppose
you see a drowning child in a pond, shouldn't
you ruin your business suit and your nice shoes
and weighed in there to rescue the child from
death even though it's gonna cost you your nice
clothing. And Baxter essentially said the same thing in
his Christian directory, his comprehensive guide to a Christian
living in which he said you should give up
the fancy clothing of your wife and Children and
not obtain for them anything more than plain clothing
so that you can dedicate that money to save
the poor.
Yeah. So I, I mean, uh one very interesting
thing here is that, of course, uh today, there's
uh at least one general idea that is that
we tend to associate the work ethic with conservatism
and the political, right? Mostly. But since we're also
going to go through some of the intellectual history,
intellectual background here over the course of the last
few centuries. Is there or has there been a
progressive slash uh left wing version of the work
ethic?
Yes. So that's exactly the key arguments of my
book is that, yes, there was a conservative work
ethic and Max Weber characterized it accurately. It's nose
to the grindstone for the workers to the maximum
profit of the capitalist. That's the regime we're living
under now. We call it neoliberalism, but it's basically
just the modern work ethic. But the, the key
discovery I've made is that Faber was only half,
right? That if you go back to the puritans,
you can actually see traces of a much more
progressive and uplifting story about workers. The point of
the work ethic on earth, not just to help
our fellow human beings, but also to exalt the
status of workers. They're doing God's work. In other
words, what puritans are saying is, it's not just
the preachers or the priests who are doing God's
work, every worker is doing God's work. And so
they have to be honored on that account. And
what does that honoring amount to? Well, you had
to pay fair and living wages. Workers are entitled
to a free choice of occupation. You can't just
force them to work at something you want them
to do. Uh So they have a certain amount
of autonomy. You're not allowed to just boss them
around tyrannically. You have to treat your employees with
love and care and concern, provide safe working conditions.
And it's, it's that what I call the progressive
or pro worker work ethic that got developed through
the 18th century, a among the political economists competing
with or arguing with the conservative political economists who
had this very harsh view that they wanted to
impose on ordinary workers. Uh And so I read
the history of classical political economy from Locke and
Smith on right through Marx. Uh AND Edward Bernstein
an unknown hero, social democracy. Uh THAT whole history,
I read as an argument between the conservative and
the progressive work ethic advocates. And once you see,
once you read the text in light of the
work ethic, it all falls into place and makes
sense. Yes.
OK. So going a few centuries back, uh one
of the most prominent figures whose work you explore
in the book is John Locke. So what does
John Locke have to do with the work ethic?
I mean, what did he have to say about
it?
Yeah. So keep in mind that Locke is writing
only a couple of decades after the end of
the English Civil War. And Richard Baxter actually marched
with the parliamentary army against the king. He was
a chaplain to the army. OK. So we know
whose side he was on. And Locke basically famously
advanced a labor theory of property. So in the
state of nature, the only way to get a
just claim to property is to work it, right?
You have to be growing something on it, making
it productive. It's a very calvinist idea, right? And
then you, you get to own that property in
virtue of the fact that you're, that you're basically
enacting God's will and helping your fellow human beings
by, right, making the earth productive, be fruitful and
multiply, right? That's God's command. And um he advanced
this ethic, I argue uh to justify uh the
constitutional claims of the Levelers who uh advanced a
very radical uh constitutional agenda during the English Civil
war. They wanted to abolish uh the privileges of
the Lords abolish the House of Lords, put everyone
on common law. So keep in mind when we
talk about common law today, we assume that everybody
is subject to common law. But back in those
days, the Lords had their own set of laws
that they passed in the House of Lords that
were just for themselves, right? And they could not
be tried by commoners. They were tried by peers,
peers, of course, were fellow members of the House
of Lords, right? And so they had all these
privileges and, and commoners couldn't sue them. They were
totally unaccountable. Like you couldn't trust a contract between
a lord and yourself if you were a commoner
because the Lord could just like take whatever you
made like a tailor might be, make some fine
dresses and suits and so forth and then not
pay you and the tailor would be out all
of that money and cut it to the Lord,
right? So the Levelers and then Locke argued for
equality under the law. Very important. You don't have
different classes of people where one has special privileges
over the other. And also for the primacy of
parliament, right. Parliament makes the laws, not the king
and the king can't even veto those laws, right.
And so lacks constitutional proposals are the Levelers. So
the Levelers were explicitly arguing on behalf of the
common ordinary welcome against the lords who were oppressing
them. And of course, the king who was taxing
them and doing other awful things.
And one of the things you explore in the
book is the initial intellectual developments that led to
conservatives hijacking the concept of the work ethic and
turning it against the workers. And of course, we
don't have of course time uh to go through
every single one of these figures, like for example,
Priestly Malthus Burke and others. But could you tell
us perhaps uh in a summarized way what these
intellectual developments were and how exactly did they turn
the work ethic against the workers?
Yes. So just keep in mind that what happens
during the industrial revolution is a split between what
I call a conservative work ethic, which is basically
the property owners or the capitalist work ethic and
the uh progressive work ethic, which is a work
ethic advanced by uh and on behalf of workers.
Now, if you look at the original work ethic.
What it does is it unites the rights and
the duties of workers. Workers have to work really
hard, but then they're entitled to reap the fruits
of their labor, right? You get the benefits for
performing the duties here on earth, not just waiting
for the next life. Um But during the industrial
revolution and the way the puritans could make that
unity possible is that their model workers were manual
workers who also had property claims. The yeoman farmer
either owned his own plot of land or had
a long, very long lease on it. Uh The
merchant uh owns his own shop but was also
manually crafting manufactured items like shoes and so forth.
Um So the rights and duties were naturally unified
in the 17th century in the typical or model
puritan worker. Uh But by the industrial revolution, you
see a radical split where workers become wage laborers
with no property at all or no claims on
property income, a capital income. Uh BECAUSE the machines
are too big and expensive for them to own
capitalists on those things, the factories and so forth,
right? The workers are impoverished and similar things happened
in agriculture too, which is very important. The workers
lost access to land, they could no longer lease
their own land. The the the big landlords basically
gobbled it all up often by force of parliament
just forced sales. Um So the workers are impoverished
now and have only their wages to rely on
in order to survive. So and, and so you
have to, because the work ethic is the dominant
conceptual scheme, but a normative scheme in England at
the time, everybody had to fit their preferred mode
of social organization within the terms of the work
ethic because that was just the dominant ideology. So,
although the workers work ethic, I think has a
natural unity to it. Uh WHERE the rights and
duties go hand in hand, the capitalists had to
explain how they get all the, all the benefits
of the work ethic, right? The workers get all
the duties, right? And so the way they did
this to move quite quickly through, uh the basic
theory was of the Conservatives that poor workers would
not willingly work hard. Uh EXCEPT if they were
forced to under conditions of poverty and precarity. OK.
And so to make them do their duty to
work hard, right? You have to stick them in
those positions. But also perhaps to give them some
promise that if they do work hard and save
and practice these other work ethic virtues, then maybe
they could become rich, at least they'll have a
shot at that. So, and what that means then
that the key problem for the Conservatives is that
there was a poor law in England. It's basically
a national run welfare system under which the deeply
impoverished could claim some handouts from the government typically
in cash that they could use to survive. And
of course, that comes right from the effective altruism
part of the puritans only they thought it was
a strict duty to give so you can tax
people to do it. It's not voluntary, right. You
have to be an effective altruist. So it's ok
to tax you to do that. So, but they
hated the poor law because they imagined it turns
out falsely that it gave an outlet for lazy
idlers to live off the public fisk rather than
working hard. Ok. Now, this is completely false, but
that's what they imagined. And so we have a
variety of schemes then to somehow eliminate or radically
change the work ethic to make sure that lazy
people can't just live off our hard earned tax
dollars. Ok. So Priestley's idea is you abolish the
poor law and you enroll workers in a forced
savings plan where they had to save for any
possible accidents in their retirement, out of their own
wages. Ok. Um Benson's thought, well, we, we can't
have people just get cash without having to work
in return and we can't leave them at their
liberty because, you know, if they're poor, they're probably
doing shady things. So we have to uh put
them all in a panopticon, a prison panopticon and
force them to work in return for their food
and, you know, room board dress and so forth
under humiliating and totalitarian conditions. Moth is thought let's
gradually phase out the core loss, you announce it
in advance. So people have plenty of time to
prepare. Right. And, and then, you know, I then
that will force people to be prudent to save,
to delay child rearing to childbearing until they can
afford it to delay marriage until they can afford
Children and so forth. Right. And then we won't
need, we won't need the poor law anymore because
it will force people to be prudent and adopt
the work ethic virtues, you know, working hard saving
prudence. Looking ahead, not having, you know, more kids
than you can afford and so forth. Haley is
arguing against envy of the of, of the better
off. He says, look, you workers, you think you
have it so hard. But in reality, it's the
lords who have life really hard because they're wringing
their hands all the time on how they can
find adequate positions for their 2nd, 3rd and 4th
born sons under the laws of inheritance. At the
time, the firstborn son would inherit everything. And so
the fathers then had right, this desperate scramble to
find positions that were, you know, had enough dignity
to them for uh the lower born sons, the
later born sons, so that they wouldn't fall into
a catastrophe. And then Burke and Whateley uh Burke
advance the idea that workers are entitled to nothing
more than exactly what the market gives them. Ok?
So if they starve under the market level wage.
Well, that's too bad. Right. There shouldn't be any
poor law to supplement that. Right. So, keep Burke
here and Malthus are very close together. Um, AND
lately invented European imperialism, the ideology of European imperialism
on biblical grounds. So, he was a theologian and
lately believed that, uh, uh God had already given
the gifts of agriculture to human beings after their
expulsion from the Garden of Eden. And so if
you come across a people who are backward and
don't even have, you know, agriculture and herding and
uh uh you know, working advanced metallurgy and this
kind of stuff, then it must have been that
they've slipped back due to their idleness. And consequently,
it's the, it's, it's, you know, the burden of
the civilized, the most civilized that is the Europeans
to lift them up by ruling over them, right?
And that's really right, the white man's burden is
coming straight out of Whateley,
a another burden by the way, another burden because
earlier, for example, you mentioned the fact that the
capitalists, the business owners and all of that, the
factory owners have that burden of trying to distribute
things through among their 2nd, 3rd and 4th son
and whatever.
Exactly.
So, so yeah, so, uh ok, so perhaps uh
there's many things there that interestingly enough ring a
lot of different bells because they start to sound
very curiously close to uh neo liberalism.
But we'll get,
but, but we'll get there. We'll get. Ok. So
there are two other specific, uh, I guess, standards,
I guess we could call them of the work
ethic and more specifically the conservative work ethic that
I would like to ask you about and the
progressive version of it, we're going to get into
it in just a bit. But, uh, what about,
uh, the, what about independence and personal responsibility? I
mean, when exactly were those two aspects of the
work ethic introduced? And what role do they play
there? Exactly.
Yes. So independence and personal responsibility are terms that
are introduced in the late 18th century with the
rise of the conservative work ethic. Uh AND independence
basically means not receiving uh means tested welfare benefits
from the state. That's all it means because of
course, it can't mean for the Conservatives getting money
that you haven't earned by working for it since
they're all recipients of capital income. And indeed the
inventor of this idea of independence priestly conceded that
the rich by which he meant the landlords and
other recipients of passive capital income, fairly dependent, their
own standard of living matter of stigmatizing, receipt of
means tested welfare benefits. The idea of personal responsibility
I think is ambiguous because it means two things.
One thing that it means is you have to
bear the costs and benefits of the consequences of
your own conduct where those costs and benefits are
determined by the market. And so responsibility in this
sense is just who's gonna bear the costs. Uh
But then there's another sense of personal responsibility, which
is the assumption that if you are bearing a
lot of costs like you are very poor, it
must be because you were in some sense, irresponsible,
not prudent, not obeying the dictates of the work
ethic, not working hard enough, having too many kids
before you're able to afford to raise them things
like that. And so that notion of personal responsibility
as the opposite of irresponsibility is a way to
blame the poor for their misfortunes.
So before we get into the progressive version of
the work ethic and some of the biggest names
associated with it, uh Let's talk here a little
bit about some of the political applications that the
conservative work ethic first had. So for example, in
the book, you go through things like the English
welfare reform, the Irish Poor law, the Irish famine
policy. Could you tell us a little bit about
that? I mean, I, in what ways did the
conservative work ethic? Uh I mean, from uh that
was I guess originally a philosophy in what ways
did it translate into actual policy?
Uh What I argue is that a prime implication
of the conservative work ethic is an extreme skepticism
and very stinting attitude towards public welfare benefits for
the poor. Uh THAT the poor are just trying
to be lazy and lie in a hammock while
they consume taxpayer funding there's a a punitive attitude
towards anyone who falls into a condition of neediness.
And that leads to an inclination for some kind
of imprisonment of the poor and subjection to forced
labor. So you have the invention of the workhouse,
which already it sort of existed in the 17th
century but not, they were considered houses of correction
and they were temporary lodgings where somebody who is
say, begging on the streets without a permit might
be said to be whipped and then, you know,
sent on their way. Uh BUT workhouses in the,
in the 18th century, it become a serious matter
where you could even be consigned for life once
you were destitute and they were designed to be
incredibly punitive and harsh. And in the late 18th
century, the welfare roles are increasing and they continue
to increase in the early 19th century. Malthusian panic
erupts. There's this idea that the poor are just
breeding like rabbits and they're going to overwhelm everyone
and and just ask for, you know, more and
more and eat up all the rents. That was
the great worry that the landlords because taxation to
support the poor law was on uh land, right?
It would be the landowners who ultimately bore that
cost. And they were worried that all the rents
would just be eaten up with welfare tax payments.
So they became very punitive as a means of
deterring uh the poor from even applying for benefits
and punishing them if they were allowed. And so
the workhouses were basically prisons. People lost all civil
rights. They were subjected to more demeaning conditions even
than criminals. So for instance, criminals would get a
spoon. Right. But they, but, but the people in
the poor houses had to eat with their hands.
Oh my God, deliberately humiliating. Right. And that's a
deterrence. And it's also a test of whether they're
really needy because no one would ever accept these
conditions if they could have any other way of
scrounging a living. So in uh 1832 in England,
uh parliament passes a welfare reform in which they
declare that everyone who claims aid has to enter
a workhouse as a condition of getting it. This
was never realistic because workhouses were way more expensive
then uh just giving cash handouts to people who
stayed in their cottages. Um And of course, there
was always outrage at the extreme cruelty of the
workhouses. So they were very unpopular. Uh And, and
so welfare policy gyrates between the hyper punitive and
the lower cost because the landlords also didn't want
to pay higher taxes. You never really had a
stable regime. They keep on going back and forth
on that. Uh And then in Ireland, the situation
was somewhat different because there the uh the conservative
work ethic people in parliament thought that the Irish
landlords as well as the Irish peasants were exceptionally
lazy, lacked industrious industriousness, they lacked frugality they would
just be spendthrifts and waste all their rents on
high living. These were stereotypes and the English thought
that they had perfected modern agriculture by adopting a
capitalist system of agriculture. And so their project for
welfare reform in Ireland was basically to force the
landlords to bear the costs of welfare uh for
the poor in order to force them to get
more efficient and productive on their estates. And the
capitalist model would eliminate the peasantry instead of peasants,
each farming their own plot of land to farm
their own food. They would be reduced to wage
laborers, landless and effectively destitute to make them work
harder because they're desperate every day to find a
means to provide for themselves and their families. So
they're really gonna work hard. That was the theory.
Uh And, and so they imposed on Ireland some
requirements to create a poor law which hadn't really
been in existence before, mainly to burden the landlords
and force them to get more productive and efficient
by adopting a capitalist system. And then when the
Irish famine struck, that was due to a potato
blight. Uh AND potatoes were the main uh crop
that fed a very high percentage of the Irish,
especially in the rural areas. Uh People started starving
and welfare policy. Famine relief policy was run from
the Treasury Department in London. And uh people in
parliament thought that this was a wonderful opportunity to
clear the estates of all those lazy peasants who
could simply before they would be able to plant
a quarter acre with potatoes and feed a large
family on that tiny little plot and potatoes pretty
much grow with very little tending, tending. So, uh,
they didn't, they weren't working as hard, right. Um
And so, uh, and so the conservative work ethic
advocates saw the famine as a wonderful opportunity to
clear the estates of peasants. Hopefully they go elsewhere
if they didn't starve. And indeed millions went to
the United States, Canada, Australia where wherever they could
manage, many, you know, many others died. And this
was uh our path to forcing a capitalist system
of agriculture on Ireland. At least that was the
thought and consequently famine relief, although it was practiced
was extremely stingy and many devices were invented to
uh reduce the peasants to absolute destitution and to
make it almost impossible for them to get aid.
And so on the other hand, what were the
main ideas of people like Adam Smith, David Ricardo
and the other Ricard and socialists that can be
classified as a progressive work ethic. And what are
some of the main ways in which it differs
from uh the conservative version of the work ethic.
Yeah. So um just recall that in the late
18th century, the work ethic splits between a pro
worker and a pro uh uh capitalist version. Conservatives
give us the pro capitalist version. Uh But then
the people I call progressives because they all believe
in progress. Uh And they have a certain view
of what it takes to get progress. Um They're,
they're on the pro worker side. And so that
includes Adam Smith to a certain degree, David Ricardo,
some of ambiguous figure, but there was a group
of so called Ricard and socialists who took some
of Ricardo's ideas to their logical conclusion. Uh John
Stuart Mill and ultimately, even Karl Marx are on
the pro worker or progressive side. The critical difference
that the progressives have with the uh conservatives is
in their attitudes towards poor workers. The conservatives thought
workers, poor workers would quit as soon as they
got enough to survive, they would quit working. The
progressives all thought, look, if you, if you pay
them decently, they'll be and give them a reasonable
prospect of improving their lot in life, that will
be an incentive for them to work harder. So
you have a split between uh the incentives that
we assume the poor have. Right? One thinks to
make them work hard, they have to be in
a situation of poverty and precarity. And the other
side says, no, give them realistic prospects for improving
their condition and they will work as hard as
you want them to work. But also there's another
fundamental difference in attitude towards the poor. And here
the poor of course, were the vast majority of
workers. The middle class was still very, very, very
tiny Yeah. Uh, A and, and that just has
to do with, um, whether you trust the poor
to use their freedom wisely. So, the conservatives were
forever wringing their hands over the imprudence. They imagined
the poor had that they're having reckless sex and
having too many babies and so forth. But, uh,
for the progressives, how people behave is fundamentally a
feature of the incentives that they face and you
could arrange positive incentives in such a way that
people will both work hard and be prudent in
other ways. They'll save money, they'll do, they'll practice
all of the work ethic virtues if you give
them positive opportunities. Uh And, and so you can
trust workers to promote the, their self interest and
the interests of their families under a properly organized
uh system of social institutions, especially property arrangements.
Mhm. Uh You know, one before we go on
one of the reasons why I was laughing a
little bit when you mentioned the ideas that some
of the more conservative people have about the poor
and the destitute and particularly them having more Children
than they should uh in, in their mind. Of
course, uh uh is that I I it sounds
really close to some of the ideas that we
heard and still here, unfortunately, from the eugenicists, for
example, because I mean, it's always this idea that,
oh my God, poor people, uh the low IQ
people, for example, in the 20th century. And now
people talk about a lot about IQ, for example,
low IQ people are having so much chil, uh,
so many Children. Uh, AND, uh, it's, uh, a
disaster and stuff like that. Uh, I mean, it's,
it's always, it, I, I laugh because these ideas
are not as original as probably many, many people
might think.
Oh, absolutely. I mean, when it comes to welfare
policy, arguments in, uh, the United States and to
a great extent, also in uh uh the UK
Conservatives haven't thought a new thought about welfare policy
since Malthus, they continue to repeat the same uh
uh denigrating and suspicious ideas about the poor, regardless
of enormous amounts of counter evidence against their assumptions.
So now we have literally hundreds of experiments of
a basic income where you just hand poor people
cash on a monthly basis and see how they
do. And overwhelmingly, they're not just lying back and
quitting work, but rather they're using that money to
improve their condition precisely as uh Adam Smith thought
they would, you know, they're going out there, they're
using the money to uh you know, get more
education, maybe to start a business. Uh BASICALLY there
that it gives them a longer time horizon with
which they can plan because they don't just have
to concentrate exclusively on finding their next meal. And
that longer time horizon enables them to plan for
bigger things like investing in their own skills uh
or just taking on bigger projects than is possible
if you're practically on the edge of starvation all
the time.
Uh So, uh let me ask you about Marx
specifically because of course, he's a huge figure in
the 19th century and in economics more largely so,
uh how did these ideas about an, an alienated
work tied to his progressive work ethic?
Yeah. So this is one of my mo my
favorite discoveries in reading the text. Uh Marx, of
course, was uh educated at a Christian Academy in
Germany uh uh as a minor. Uh AND in
his abature, this is his uh graduation final examination.
Uh He was assigned to write on the topic
of a young man's choice of vocation. That is
how does a young man decide what his calling
will be. And in his examination essay, he exactly
reproduces uh Robert Sanderson's criteria for finding one's calling.
Sanderson was 1/17 century puritan preacher and he uh
wrote a very famous sermon that was reprinted many,
many times in including deep into the 19th century
in which he laid out his criteria, right? And,
and they were, you have to choose something that
will positively benefit uh other people, not just yourself
uh that you will personally find fulfilling because it
exercises skills that you enjoy practicing. Uh AND um
that, you know, conforms, you're able to deploy those
skills effectively, right? So you had education in those
skills and essentially in his final exam marks reproduces
all of those criteria. Uh It adds that there's
also an expectation of recognition from the recipients of
your services. They'll appreciate what you did, right? That
you're showing how you care about their welfare and
doing a conscientious job for them and they reciprocate
by honoring what you're doing for them. And that
idea became Marx's idea of un alienated labor. I
mean, step by step. So you can see in
a beautiful way how the puritan notion of the
calling leads directly to Marx's ideal of un alienated
labor. Really, the puritans had already figured it out.
Uh And then of course, his critique of capitalism
in the 1844 manuscripts is essentially, well, we're not,
workers aren't getting anything like those conditions, right? They're
consigned to drudgery, boring repetitive tasks that are, you
know, mechanized, they're reduced to drudges, nobody appreciates what
they're doing. They're bored out of their minds. Their
work is deskilled. Uh And I, I hasten to
add that on these points. Marx and Smith were
in agreement. Both of them agreed that industrial labor
in the factories was horrible for the worker. That
is their daily experience of work was absolutely awful.
Uh And both lamented this fact as did Jon
Stewart Mill. So they're all the progressives are united
on their values about what, what, what a good
job would look like. They all agree and they're
all taking their cues historically. I mean, they're all
descended from the Puritan tradition of what a good
calling would be like,
and by the way, I guess that it's safe
to say that even today, uh, this sort of
an alienated work, it is still true. At least
to a great extent for people who work what
we could call essential jobs. There is the jobs
that keep society and the ideas that people tend
to have about, uh, those workers, the kind of
work they do and the low status they have
in society are still more or less the same.
Right? And, and I'm, I mean, I'm commenting, I'm
commenting that just because, uh sometimes times we hear
people saying that, oh, the, the bad days of
exploitative work in capitalism for people who worked in
very bad e extremely bad conditions in factories and
elsewhere. Uh They're, they're gone. They, they, they, they
occurred in the 19th century. They're not here anymore.
But I, I mean, I guess that's not exactly
true. Right.
It's not true. Although it is the case that
automation has massively reduced the uh percentage of workers
in the rich countries for being on assembly lines.
However, if you look at the global economy, sweatshop
manufacturing is all over the world and those conditions
are, you know, not distinguishable from those in the
19th century, uh they're using higher tech, but it's
equally drudgery. It's dangerous, it's dirty, it's unhealthy. Right.
It's awful growing and it pays horribly and it's
not, you know, it's very unsafe all the things
that Marx complained about, not just in the 1844
manuscripts but throughout Capitol.
So in more recent times, in the 20th century,
specifically with the rise of social democracy in what
ways did it encapsulate a progressive work ethic?
Yes. So I read social democracy as it was
originally uh imagined uh by Edward Bernstein, who was
uh intellectual leader in Germany's Social Democratic Party as
a kind of combination of the progressive work ethic
because it puts them all together in a package,
stressing the importance of decom modifying labor, that is
not just reducing workers to whatever they can get
in competitive markets controlled by capitalists. Uh ENABLING people
to uh you know, get decent wages, safe working
conditions, you, you regulate the factories, uh but also
a rich body of benefits that don't depend on
working. So social welfare benefits, paid vacations, um access
to education that you don't have to pay for
out of pocket um medical care, other kinds of
social insurance. Um All of these ideas are I
think are coming out of the progressive work ethic
and going back actually to the puritan idea that
the economy and the division of labor exists to
advance everyone's welfare. And it doesn't exist in order
to manifest externally some presumed hierarchy of virtue among
workers. And it also is based the, the social
democracy is a very freedom oriented uh system. It
wants to give people lots of free time so
that they could choose to use on their own
judgment rather than working from dawn to dusk at
somebody o somebody else's direction,
right? And in what ways does that tie to
historically speaking, the origins of social insurance? And what
role does that play in the sort of history
that you are exploring in the book?
Yeah. So social insurance is really interesting because uh
it was the idea of social insurance uh was
invented by uh Kor and during the French revolution
and Tom Payne, the great American revolutionary who also
played a minor role in the French revolution. Uh
Payne and Conor say actually knew each other. Uh
AND Payne traveled to uh uh Paris um during
the revolution and uh escaped with his head. I'm
like kind of said he was executed by the
Jacobins. Uh But these ideas were in the air
and the great contribution that um Tom Payne made
was to show demonstrate its feasibility. That is what
he was postulating was based on uh British data
treasury receipts. Basically that if you just tax inheritances,
uh you could pay a perfectly fine social insurance
package that would include uh retirement benefits for people,
too old to work. Uh DISABILITY benefits, uh survivors
benefits for orphans and widows that it wouldn't take
much of a tax on inheritances to give every
poor person uh you know, adequate insurance against destitution.
And that could then replace the poor laws. It
would be a universal benefit for everyone. So you
wouldn't have to means test uh uh benefits. Uh
AND you would um get them on a non
stigmatized basis because everyone would get them. It wasn't
a sign of shame or stigma if you received
it since everyone was entitled to this. And he
argued on strictly lacking grounds that the landlords owed
a rent to everyone else because once they enclosed
the land, they deprived other people of access to
it, even though the lackey deception of course, is
that the earth started off owned in common by
everyone, right? And so the landlords owed to the
rest of society, the value of production that could
be credited to unimproved land. Uh And that's with
the tax with yields. Uh AND he proved it
was perfectly feasible to abolish poverty uh by implementing
this social insurance system. And also he thought the
inheritance tax would be enough to give every young
person starting out in life a basic grant, a
capital grant, just a lump sum of money which
they could use to purchase tools or an education
or whatever they need, start off in life at,
at a higher wage, right? So that they wouldn't
fall into poverty in the first place,
right? And so finally getting into the subtitle of
your book, what is neoliberalism? What characterizes it exactly?
And how was it influenced by the conservative work
ethic?
So my argument is that neoliberalism, I'm just defining
this as a set of policies. First off, just
a set of policies that systematically favor capitalists over
workers. And there's a lot of them, uh, that
includes, um, low marginal tax rates on supersized income,
favorable tax treatment of capital income. Uh, THE insistence
that, uh, employers have a monopoly over the direction
of their companies with workers not having any voice.
Uh, A set of global free trade agreements that
forbid states from regulating businesses in ways that might
reduce their profits. Right? There's a whole set of
policies like this that all skew in favor of
capital. Oh, and extreme hostility to labor unions, right?
Workers should get a voice. They should just rely
on what the market gives them and hostility, of
course, to welfare payments or any access to income
other than work for ordinary people. Um So you
put that all together, right? And that's neoliberalism today.
And the critical issue is neoliberalism is packaged to
uh contemporary people on the theory that, well, it's
about free markets and all the freedom you can
have on the market as a consumer or as
a worker or as a business owner. But in
reality, it's really a theory of shrinking the size
of the state and state capacity because neoliberalism also
thinks all those lazy bureaucrats, they can't do anything
efficiently. So government services should be outsourced to private,
for profit corporations here in the United States that's
been carried to a significant extent. We have private
for profit prisons, just as Bentham advocated, we have
uh private for profit schools even in elementary grades.
Uh RIGHT, they might be tax funded, but it's
really a private entrepreneur who is organizing the school
and running it for profit. Um So that's neoliberalism.
And my argument is that neoliberalism just is the
latest version of the conservative work ethic. It's like
let the capitalists roll and design property and markets
and other institutions in their favor, uh hostility to
state capacity or any state benefits. Um BECAUSE the
workers should be in a state of precarity and
right under the ideology of personal responsibility and not
being dependent. Right. Uh That's going back to priestly.
It's all the same. And what I'm doing then
is showing that our contemporary neoliberalism, it's just a
rewarmed fru of the conservative work ethic. And we
should recognize that fact. It's about capitalist ruling.
Yeah. And I guess that people need to stop
complaining because if they are not rich yet, it's
just because they're not working hard enough.
Right. Right. I mean, that's the theory.
Yeah. And so how does welfare policy operate within
neo liberal capitalism?
Yeah. And this is like the great contrast between
the social democracies and the model of welfare policy
that we see exemplified most strongly in the United
States, but to a certain degree in Britain as
well, at least under Tory governments. And the, the,
the basic idea is you, you have a general
hostility towards universal benefits. So, in the United States,
the Democratic Party has been trying since around 1948
to get universal health care and inch by inch.
It's been a massive struggle. We still don't quite
have it. Obamacare made a major step towards universal
health care. But in fact, there are still many
millions of Americans who have inadequate or unaffordable health
insurance or none at all. Right, because they just
can't afford it. Um And that's right that you
could see that coming out of the hostility to
welfare programs that we see in pre priestly and
Malthus. Um uh AND, and so I see the
United States as really the conservative work ethic on
steroids under neoliberalism, things have to be means tested.
There's very, it's very stingy, welfare benefits, very mean
spirited, lots of arbitrary obstacles in front of getting
them a deep impatience with people who are on
benefits for too long, arbitrary cut off dates. That
was the welfare reform that Clinton enacted in 1996.
It's all the same.
Mhm. Uh And particularly when it comes to business
ethics in neoliberalism. How does a conservative work ethic
translate into it? Exactly. And particularly with this sort
of shareholder version of capitalism.
Yeah. So, um in the immediate post war era,
the United States had a brief era of stakeholder
capitalism and that meant that corporations and uh the,
the heads of corporations thought that it was their
duty to serve all of the stakeholders in the
firm, you had high rates of unionization. And so
even nonunion jobs had to keep up with those
wages that were set in the unionized uh, factories.
Uh, AND CEO S would take pride in the
fact that they had so many well paid workers,
but there were other CEO S who opposed that
and had a more conservative view of things and
thought that, well, you know, a business is not
a charity, businesses should be run strictly for the
owners that is the shareholders. And our sole duty
is to maximize profits. That's what the economist Milton
Friedman said. Uh And that theory took off uh
with the rise of neo liberal ideology starting in
the 19 seventies, it really took off with the
election of Ronald Reagan who pressed the liberal policy.
Uh And of course, labor unions had been in
decline again since around 1948 actually. Uh uh THE
post war era, a major anti union bill was
passed, uh called the Taft Hartley bill, uh which
Truman vetoed, but he was overwritten. Truman called it
a slave labor bill. He thought it would destroy
labor unions and it took some decades. But in
fact, labor union rates now in the private sector
are around 6% down from around a third of
workers uh in the private sector. Uh AT their
peak, there's a big difference in bargaining power if
you don't have a labor union. And, and if
you don't have high labor density, labor union density.
So workers have been falling back and capitalists have
been massively enlarging their profits. Now, what the puritans,
you know said is that it's fine to make
money, but you're not allowed to make money in
predatory and exploitative ways. And they listed some of
those ways. One of them is their very stern
anti monopolists and they didn't care whether the monopoly
was established by the state, a state grant, a
monopoly or whether it was achieved through various kinds
of private sector, business tactics. It was wrong. You're
not allowed to exploit other people by charging monopoly
prices or monopoly prices on labor. That is if
you're the only employer say in a factory town,
you can drive wages down because those workers have
no other choice. They didn't like either and they
didn't like uh you know, exploiting renters. That was
also bad just hiking the rents because you could
uh and they also oppose making huge profits based
on zero sum financial speculation. In all the neo
liberal economies, we see a financialization happening where banks
are uh taking a larger and larger share of
profits as they are uh as they, it's, they
are playing more and more purely speculative zero sum
games. We saw what happened with the height of
speculation in 2007 and eight. It basically drove the
world economy into recession for years. Um The ps
didn't understand macroeconomics but they did understand that if
you just are playing a lot of zero sum
games, you're just profiting at other people's expense, you're
not adding value, you're not promoting human welfare. So
they were very sternly opposed to making mon money
that way. But that's actually the chief source of
profits. If you add up monopoly profits and profits
from speculation, that's basically most of the profits that
corporations are making now in the global economy. So
their business models would be condemned by the puritans
and they're also condemned by social democracy.
So this sort of neo liberal version of the
conservative work ethic is the work ethic that is
dominant in the world uh today.
Right? I think that's correct. Yes. Um It, it's
because the global rules of uh trade have been
written in a neo liberal uh uh with a
neo liberal orientation. So they prevent countries who have
signed on to the World Trade Organization from taking
measures that would reduce the profits of foreign investors
uh because of, you know, taxation or regulation or
minimum wages or any of the other techniques that
social democracies use to improve the lot of ordinary
workers.
So my final question will be then, uh what
can and should we do about it then? WW
how can we deal? Uh I mean, how can
we go or try to go beyond the current
state of affairs with neoliberalism, this newer version of
the conservative work ethic and perhaps strive for uh
to uh I mean, try to get into a
more progressive version of it.
Well, so I, I am working from the premise
that some idea about the work ethic still has
a deep hold certainly in the United States and
the other uh countries uh that were uh orig
originally settled by the English. So that would include
Australia, New Zealand and so forth. Um THAT work
ethic values still exists. It's, it's in the discourse.
And so one of the big contributions of my
book is I wanna say, look, there really is
a positive side to the work ethic and it
makes a certain amount of sense. These are genuine
virtues. They're not the only virtues, of course. And
one of the chief uh benefits of social democracy
is that it gives us room to develop other
values, other virtues besides the work ethic virtues. But
it's still the case that social democracy does depend
on uh people working. There's nothing wrong with expecting
reciprocity from one another. Um As the parents insisted,
that meant that even the rich should be working.
And that means positively promoting human welfare and not
just collecting income passively or engaging in predatory business
methods, but really positively helping other people through disciplined
work. Um Anyone who's able to do that, I
think should be expected to do their share. And
the social democracies depend on that because if people
aren't working, you can't raise taxes needed to find
a generous welfare state. So you see uh actually
a stress in these, in these countries on high
labor force participation uh and mechanisms such as uh
state paid um preschools to make that possible for
women to participate at high rates as well. Um
So what I want to argue is, look, we,
we can't really escape the work ethic. I think
uh it's deeply embedded in these cultures. Uh BUT
we can turn it around and use it in
favor of workers uh rather than use it against
them. And so the chief contribution of my book
is to unearth the what I call the progressive
work ethic and shows that it animated a large
number of thinkers from the 19th century through the
glory days of social democracy. I think today that
social democracy still remains the most successful model we've
ever had of a more equal and fair society,
although it's fallen on hard times. And I think
what we need to do is re envision social
democracy and reinvigorate it by uh re revising social
democratic policies for the 21st century. But again, that,
that does involve acknowledging, you know, some of the
values of the work ethic. Of course, we've abandoned
for a long time, including the conservatives have abandoned
the killjoy aspects that the parents had like no
pleasure in this world, right? We've abandoned some of
the original values and rightly so, but others I
think are worth, are worth building on in a
way that would actually be helpful to workers.
Great. So the book is again hijacked how neoliberalism
termed the work ethic against workers and how workers
can take it back. I'm leaving a link to
it in the description box of the interview. And
uh Doctor Anderson, apart from the book, would you
like to tell people where they can find you
when your work on the internet?
Well, uh you can go to my website and
uh uh you know, I, I have a complete
listing of all of my publications, a lot of
them online, even if they're ever, a lot of
people have posted, including myself and I, I do
have some things that I'm free to post on
academia.edu and Research Gate. There are some articles you
could pick up or you could request articles from
me if they're still uh under re restriction restrictions
on uh wider distribution and, and you can write
to me privately and I'll send a copy at
most anything except for whole books so that I'm
not allowed to just send PDF s of old
books around those you have to buy.
Yeah. Ok, great. So I'm also adding that to
the description of the interview and thank you so
much again for taking the time to come on
the show. It's been a real pleasure to talk
to you.
Oh, it's fine. Thanks for inviting me.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno,
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam Castle Matthew Whitting
B no wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors, Philip
Forrest Connolly. Then the Met Robert Wine in NAI
Z Mark Nevs calling Hol Brookfield, Governor Mikel Stormer
Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger Ken Herz J
and Lain Jung Y and the K Hes Mark
Smith J Tom Hummel Sran David Wilson. Ya dear,
Roman Roach Diego, Jan Punter, Romani Charlotte Bli Nicole
Barba Adam Hunt, Pavlo Stassi Nale Me. Gary G
Alman, Samo, Zal Ari and YPJ Barboza Julian Price
Edward Hall, Eden Broner Douglas Fry Franca Lati Gilon
Cortez or Solis Scott Zachary. Ftw Daniel Friedman, William
Buckner, Paul Giorgino, Luke Lova Georgio Theophanous Chris Williams
and Peter Wo David Williams Di A Costa, Anton
Erickson Charles Murray, Alex Chao, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier,
Bangalore Fist Larry Dey Junior, Old Eon Starry Michael
Bailey then Spur by Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon,
Jake Zul Barnabas Radis Mark Kemple Thomas Dvor Luke
Neeson, Chris to Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica. No,
Linda Brendan Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensley Man George. Katis
Valentine Steinman, Perlis, Kate Von Goler, Alexander Albert Liam
Dan Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular J Ner Urla.
Good enough, Gregory Hastings David Pins of Sean Nelson,
Mike Levin and Jos Net. A special thanks to
my producers is our web, Jim Frank Luca Stina,
Tom Vig and Bernard N Cortes Dixon, Benedikt Muller
Thomas Trumble Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carl Negro,
Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden. And to my executive
producers, Matthew lavender, Si Adrian Bogdan Knit and Rosie.
Thank you for all.